Watch the core and answer the movie questions on tophat

Subduction zones are the most dangerous of all plate boundaries: most earthquakes, largest earthquakes, most volcanoes
The San Andread Fault is an example of a transform plate boundary, where two plates slide past each other.
Mid-ocean ridges are where new ocean plate is created. Molten rock from deep in the earth rise up in these cracks and cool and connect to the existing plate

There is no space between tectonic plates.

Plate tectonics is driven by mantle convection, slab pull, and gravitational energy gradients the process that cools Earth's hot interior.

Convection is the process by which heat is tranferred through a liquid.
Convection is the up and down movement of material because of change in tempurature.
Convection leads to new plate material forming at mid-ocean ridges and old plate material being destroyed at subduction zones.
  -A good example is a lava lamp


As rock is made at the mid-ocean ridge, and its considered as age 0. It gets older and older at is moves towards the subduction zones

Age of continental crust: oldest parts of crust known as cratons

How did the theory of plate tectonics come about?
  In 1915, Alfred Wegener (1880-1930) argued that the continents were drifting
    -This concept was universally dismissed.
    -Few believed him because it required oceanic crust to be created and destroyed.
  3 Key pieces of evidence for continental drift:
    -North and South American coastlines fit with Europe and Africe
    -Identical Volcanic flows appear on both sides of the Atlantic
    -Fossils of non-swimmers found on both sides of the modern oceans.

In the 1960s we began to be able to measure the age of ocean crust and realized that the occean crust is indeed created and destroyed
Continental Crust contains much older rocks than the oceanic crust.
  -Good evidence that oceanic crust is being created and destroyed.
  
Passive Margins are not current plate boundaries, but they were plate boundaries way back in pangea days.
  -Passive Margins are the borders of continents
  
Can a new plate boundary cause a continent to actually split in half?
  - no
  
All oceans started out at continental rifts
If it continues to spread for 10s of millions of years, the modern day east african rift will one day be the center of a new ocean.
  -Cool shit a new ocean is forming an we know it

Tectonic Plates move about as fast as your fingernails grow (1-inch per year)

Over the course of millions of years, sometimes the north and south pole switch.

  
The Himilayas, the tallestmoun rains on Earth, result from the collision of India into Eurasia,
  the only place on Earth where two continents are colliding

India colliding into Eurasia completely removed an Ocean, squashed.



