1 or 2 in class questions through tophat

The hiiayas, the tallest mountains on earth,
result from the collision of India into Eurasia, the only place on earth where two continents are colliding.

The process of isostasy is when Icebergs and mountains both float within a volume of denser material.
  
Ice (.9g/cm^3) is 10% less dense than water(1.0g/cm^3), so 10% of the iceberf floats above the water
Crust is 15% less dense than mantle, so 15% of a mountain floats above the surface.
  The underside of a mountain is called a mountain root

They also both melt over time
  Icebergs melt. When they melt, the ratio of iceberg above water stays contant
  Mountains erode over time, the ratio of mountain to mountain root stays constant.

Isostasy explains most of the Earth's topography.
  The maps of crustal thickness and height of topography are very similar
  TAKEAWAY: The measure of the deepness of mountain roots directly relate to the height of the surface crust in realtion to sea level

Why does the earth have a magnetic field?
  -The earths magnetic field arises from motion within the liquid iron outer core.
  -The magnetic field created in the outer core acs like a hige bar magnet is located in he earths core

Inclination of the magnetic field
  At the equator, the field is parallel to the earths surface.
  In alaka, the north pole on a compass arrow points down, not across the earths surface

The northern lights occer because magnetic fields
  It draws in outer space radiation, and the interaction between those particle and our atmosphere create the amazing phenominon

The magnetic field arises from complex motion associted with convetion witin the outer core (called a dynamo)

Doom and gloom? not really
  -Protection from harmful solar radiation comes primarily from our atmosphere, not the magnetic field.
  -Large solat flares (massive concentrations of charged particles) can knock out power grids and scramble communication systems.
      Without the magnetic field, these problems would get worse and would heppend immediately, but owuld not be deadly
  -Birds(and fish) and planes would not fall from the sky,
   lighting would not destroy citis, people with pacemakers would not drop dead, and no mass extinctions

Every 300,000 years or so, the poles switch
The rocks are a permanent record of the earths magnetic polarity, forming mgneti stripes on he ocean floor

times where the magnetic field matches modern day poles, called normal, when its not, called reversed

How do we know we can survive for a little without the magnetic field
  -Sometimes the poles reverse, magnetic noth becomes south and vuce versa.
  -Each magnetic reversal leads to a period of several thousand years when the magnetic field all but disapears.
  -No mass extinctions have occured during magnetic reversals

What would the immediate effect be if the Earth lost its magnetic field?
  -Our electrical grid would have some major problems

A ginormous Geode 700 miles down?

Geodes form in cavitties that fill with mineral rich water that leads to crystal growth.
  They are only found close to the earths surface

The largest Geode was found in a silver mine that was 8x2x2 in spain.






















