Q&A's

In what US state was largest knwon runup from tsunami?
  -VID
  
Which one of the following with not promote the melting of hot rocks
  -Increase of pressure

What percent of earths curst and mantle is actually magma
  -Less than 1%

In which od the following are volcanoes not found
  -Continental Collision
  
What is the source of the volcanoes found around ring of fire *Ask this one*
  -Hot Spot
  
What is the source of volcanoes found around Hawaii
  -Hot Spot with Mantle Flume
  
What is viscosit the measure of
  -How resistant a fluid is to flow
  
True or False
  -GPS are used to measure only surface horizontal displacement
  -False, also does vertical displacement

How does a stratovolcano form?
  -By alternating layers of lava and pyroclastic flows

What are cinder cones made from
  -Tephra

Which factor influenced whether or nota  volcano wil explode
  -All of the above , viscosity, amt of magma, amt of dissolved gas in magma

If a volcano erupt with a fountain of lava but no explosion, what type of eruption would it be?
  -Hawaiian (No eruption means Hawaiian)

About how many volcano related deaths have occured in the past 500 years?
  -Hundred of thousands

If a volcano erupts and it sends ash gets launched miles into the atmosphere, what type of eruption?
  -Planian

Which volcanic hazards leads to least number of deaths?
  -Lava flows
  
Which volcano hazard least to most deaths close to volcano?
  -Pyroclastic fows
  
Which volcano hazard least to most deaths far from a volcano?
  -Ash fall

Exam 2 Review

How do we measure how big an eruption is?
  -Volume of ash and rock

Why is the destruction of Pompeii historically significant?
  -It preserved the forms of those who died

Why was Plany the Younger?
  -An eye witness of Pompeii who wrote down what he saw

The destuction of Pompeii occured in 79 AD
  -True

How may very large explosive eruptions have occured in the past 2 million years
  -3

Which of the following is not evidence of a large past explosion
  -Size of the volcanic lava flows

Where did the plumes associated with hot-spots volcanism originate from
  -Top of outer core / bottom of mantle

Why do hot-spots lead to a line / chain of volcanoes
  -The movement of tectonic plates over stationary hot-spots

A caldera forms when an eruption blows the top off of a volcano
  -False

How much of the US (not Alaska and Hawaii) was covered by ash from Yellowstones spereruptions?
  -50%

How do we know the size of the magma chamber under Yellowstone
  -Seismic imaging / seismic tomography

Despite depth, it is possible to measure pressure of the chamber over time
  -True

Magma flumes are the origin of flood basalts
  -True

Which of the following did the 1815 eruption of Tambora not cause
  -Tsunami that destroyed Hawaii

Why is the Toba eruption considered important?
  -It almost wiped out humanity

Sulfuric acid droplets following large explosive volcanic eruptions can cause sustained global cooling more than ash
  -True

Exam 2 Test Review

Tsunami waves can have similar __ __ to large wind blown waves, but carry a much larger volume of water and travel mush further inland
  wave height

The most common means of generatin a tsunami is __ __ during a large subduction zone earthquake
  elastic rebound

What types of faults do not cause tsunamis?
  strike-slip faults (transform plate boundary) and normal fault (rock goes down into earth)

What kind of fault is San Andreas
  strike-slip, CANNOT produce tsunami

Tsunami wave mechanics: What happens when a tsunami approaches shore?
  Increase wave height, decrease wave speed

Wave heights are low and wavelengths are very long in the middle of the ocean

Tsunami waves (like all water waves) break when the wave height is __ to the water depth
  equal

What would most likely cause a tsunami in the middle of florida in the southwest US?
  Asteroid Impact

What would most likely cause a tsunami on the East coast US?
  Landslides

What would most likely cause a tsunami in northwest coast of the US?
  earthquakes(local), alot of subduction zone plate boundaries

What are these? Why are they important?
  They are tsunami stones, and they tell us where the tsunami was inundated in the past (how far the tsunami reached)

Why does being a good swimmer not really matter if you are in a tsunami?
  debris

What can you infer from these figures (14:00)
  There were tsunami in the past, and there are tsunami sands

About how many people have tsunamis killed in the past 1000 years?
  hundreds of thousands

Why does sea-level often drop dramatically before a tsunami arrives?
  trough

What was an important reason for the very high death toll in the Indonesian tsunami of 2004 around the Indian Ocean?
  There was no warning system (they now have a system) OTHER REASONS: lack of education, pop ensity

Tsunami warning signs and what you should do: (18:15)
  -Significant seismic shaking near the shore:
    -20-40 minutes before tsunami hits: Head to high ground
  -The tide appears to go out very fast
FILL IN

Why is it dangerous to go down to the beach after a tsunami wave hits?
  -There are more tsunami waves coming

Causes of the largest tsunami in the past 100 years is run-up are from __
  landslides

In what US state was the largest known run-up?
  Alaska

Underwater __ on the islands of Hawaii have caused numerous tsunami
  landslides

The keys to volcanism: getting hot rocks to actually melt
Melting can be caused by:
  -decreasing pressure
  -increasing tempurature
  -adding water (lowering melting point)

Magma occurs only in a few special places close to the surface where tempuratures and pressures are sufficient to melt rock
  -Approx. what percent of the Earth is magma?
    -less than 1%

In what settings are volcanoes are typically found?
  -Subduction zones, mid-oceanic ridges / divergent plate boundaries

What is the source of volcanoes around the Ring of Fire?
  -subduction zones

What is the source of volcanoes far from plate boundaries?
  -hot-spot volcanism

Hawaii owes its existence to hot-sot volcanism

The shape of a volcano and the likelihood of it erupting explosively versus effusively(calmly) is
dependent in part on the viscosity of the magma

Viscosity is a measure of liquid's resistance to flow
  -high viscosity = honey, low viscosity = water

What do GPS instruments measure at volcanoes
  surface displacement (uplift component and horizontal component)

Stratovolcanoes are midsized volcanoes that form due to alternating layers of lava and  __ flows
  pyroclastic

Cinder cones are built when __ are thrown out of a volcanic vent
  tephra

The factors that influence whether a volcano with erupt explosively or effusively:
  -the quantity of magma
  -the quantity of dissolved gas in the magma
  -the viscosity of the magma (high viscosity is more explosive)

If a volcano erupts wiht a fountain of lava but no extensive explosions, what type of eruption would it be?
  Hawaiian type (32:35)

About how any fatalities have been associated with volcanoes?
  hundreds of thousands

If a volcano erupts with an explosion so powerful it sends ash tens of thousands of feet into the atmosphere (33:40)

Which volcanic hazards leads to the least number of deaths near a volcano?
  lava flows

Which volcanic hazard leads to the most number of deaths pretty far from a volcano?
  ash fall

Which volcanic hazard leads to the most number of deaths near a volcano?
  pyroclastic flows

Volcanic ash:
  smaller than sand grains
  hard, abrasive, corrosive, electrical conducting, and do not dissolve in water
  not fluffy like ash from your BBQ

Pyroclastic flow definition: a fast moving avalanche of __ and __ pushed downhill by expanding gases
  rock and ash (same things that make the VEI index)

Has volcanisk inspired numerous works of art throughout history?
  yes

What causes harmonic tremor?
  movement of magma

Why are lahars (volcanic mudflows) particularyly dangeroud?
  they can flow very far
  they can occur many months or years after an eruption
  they can occur after rainfall

Volcanic eruption prediction
  possible within days, but very complicated

How do we measure the explosivity of an eruption in relation to others? the volume of __ and __
  rock, ash

In 79AD an eruption of Mt. Vesuvius destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum
  Why is it historically significant?
    -It rpeserved form of the dead

Who is Pliny The Younger?
  -He recorded the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius (eye witness account)

Yellowstone has __ calderas, indicating __ large eruptions in the past 2.1 __ years
  three, very, million

Geysers are fed by a pumping system with lots of bends
Hot springs do not have bends that build up pressure

Caldera sizes, the amount of ash distributed, and the size of Yellowstone pyroclastic flows are evident of the large erupions

Where do plumes originate in the deep earth?
  -The mantle-core boundary

Why do hot-spots lead to a line (chain) of volcanoes?
  The tectonic plate is moving over the stationary hotspot

How do caldera form?
  collapsing of the magma chamber

What percentage of the US was covered in ash due to Yellowstones supereruptions?
  50%

Can we detect and monotor magma chambers?
  Seismic tomography (seismic imaging)

Are mantle plumes the origin of flood basalts?
  yes

The 1815 Tambora eruption
  -Caused gobal cooling
  -produced caldera
  -inspired literature

The Toba caldera supereruption in Sumatra 74,000 years ago, lead to global cooling that __
  almost wiped out all of humanity

Aside from significant ash fallot, the other major danger of lrge ovlcanic eruptions is global cooing
  Sulfuric acid dropets following large explosive volcanic eruption can cause longer sustained global cooling tab volcanic ash.
    TRUE

