3 stages of wildfire:
  Preignition / Preheating
  Combustion
  Smoldering

What factors influence wildfire development and spreading?
  Moisture / Humidity
  Tempurature
  Vegetation
  Wind Strength
  Topography
  
Most wildfires are caused by humans

Crown fires are tjhose in which the flames reach the canopies of tree.
  They are the hottest and fastest moving of all wildfires and are extremely difficult to fight

Surface fire can be swiftly spread across grass. Low lying fires

Can really strong winds blow crown fires across whole forests in seconds? NO

Strong winds also carry burning embers (fire brands) that can start spot fires

Are surface fires dangerous to grasslands? No, grass grows from the bottom

What is the significance of the 1910 fire in Idaho and Montana?
  -Largest wildfire in US History

Ed Pulaski got people to hide in a mine as the fire passed over
  Also invented he Pulaski Axe

The US Forest services response to the 1910 wildfire was to create a policy to AGRESSIVELY FIGHT ALL WILDFIRE
  The consequence of this was that the fuels grow up alot and the Yellowstone Fire of 1988 went wild.

Over 9,000 firefighters an hundreds of aircraft were brought in to help the 1988 fire. After 3 months of fighting, the fire was finally
  put away by  1/4 inch of snow

The fore service shifted its policy of fighting fires from supression to mitigation and management
  Permit fires to burn in primitive areas and where humans and buildings are not in danger

Fire is required for pinecones to germinate? TRUE

The frontline fighters of wildfires are Hot Shot crew. Whats their main purpose?
  To prevent the spread of wildfires

Air tankers are fixed-wing aircrafts fitted with tanks that do what?
  Put water / fire retardants on the fire or on the edge of fires

Advantages of helitankers over air tankers  
  The can refill over small bodies of water
  They can be more targative where they drop
  They can refill faster

If a hotshot crew cant get close enough fast enough, send in the Smoke Jumpers. So what is their main purpose?
  They get to and attack remote wildfires before they become too destructive

Fire Shelters
  A safetydevice of last resort used by firefighters when trapped by wildfires. It is designed o reflect heat and trap breathable air.
  not designed to protect against what?
      Direct sustained flames.

Whats the significance of 2018 with respect to wildfires?
  Most destructive wildfires on record. In california

Burning embers (firebrands) are the most common means of setting houses on fire
  Can a house burn and the surrounding area be okay? Yes

Property protection: Creating  defensible space
  Your goal before a fire happens is to make your home and te surrounding area more resistant to catching fire.

Campfire Safety
  -Never park or drive on dry vegetation

A Comet is an any solar system body that, when close enough to the Sun, displays a visible coa and sometimes also a tail
VID :42

are a class of small solar system bodies in orbit around the sun further away than comets and dont have coma. 
  They can break up into meteoroids and burn up in Eatrhs atmosphere

Meteoroids are small rocks (less than a fre meters across) traveling through space
Meteors are small rocks from space that light up the night skky as they burn up in the Earths Atmosphere
Meteorites are peices of these meteors that make it all the way down do the surface

Martain meteorites are found on Earth? TRUE

Asteroids are large space rocks that range is sizefrom emters to 100s of kilometers
Asterois ave smooth surfaces dur to a coating of Regolith from many impacts

Most asteroids are found between Jupiter and Mards

But some asteroids orbit well inside Mars
  The asteroids that orbit near Earth are known as NEOs
  
There are an estimated 1 million asteroids bigger than 1km in diameter and billions of smaller ones
  But is the asteroid belt crowded? NO

Comets are dirty ice balls that subliate as they approach the Sun, relaasing dust and gas to form two sails

Comets ISON's highly elliptical orbit around the Sun showed that it came from very far away.

Long-peroid comets come from the outer edges of our Solar System in a spherical regoin called the OORT CLOUD.
What shape is the OORT CLOUD? Spherical

Hallet's Comet is the most famous comet because it comes around twice in a lifetime

Its all about the speed: When an asteroid hits the earth it is generally traelin 7:30 VIDEO
Consequences of asteroid impacts behaving like explosions: round craters

Why are there large dark spots on the moon?
  They are from impacts that produce Mar. We know they are young because there are no impact craters in that region

Why does the earth have less distinguishing impact craters adn the moon?
  We have an erosion process that the Moon doesnt have

The thin layer of clat that seperates Cretaceous from Paleogene sediments all over the world 
  contains alot of iridiuim, shocked quartz, and soot, indicative of a giant impact and global fire.

About how may years apart can we expect an extinction level immpact event?
  Every hundred million years

Example collision avoidance strategies aimed at DEFLECTION of a potential impactor
  -Kinetic impact: crash a heavy spacecraft into it to alter trajectory
  VIDEO 13:00

The inner planets are much closer to the Sun then the outer planets
  Not an even distribution

Mercury
  -Rotates very slowly, It takes two mercury years (176 earth days) to complete one Mercury day/night cycle
  -The day/night terminous moves at a leisurely walking pace of only 2mph
  -Daytime: 840F

Which planet has the hottest daytie tempurature in our Solar System?
  Venus

The surface of Mars: Cold, dry, dusty, shws to evidence of life.
Where there is water, we think there may be life

There were rivers and lakes on Mars Billions of years ago

Mars has interesting topography
  -Tallest mountain in all of the Solar System
  -Deepest Basin in all of the Solar System
  -Longest, widest, and deepest canyon in all of the Solar System

Is the Great Red Spot on Jupiter an Impact? NO, its a storm, its shrinking, and its diameter is larger than Earths

Saturns rings average only 10 meters in thickness

Do all the Giant Planets have rings? Yes

Saturns moon Titan
  -Has rain, snow, lakes, and rivers.
  -It is too cold for water, the liquid is methane

We are faced with a choice:
  -The solar system has more than a dozen planets and counting
  -The solar system has 8 planets and an ever growing number of dwarf planets
  -Since pluto has not CLEARED THE NEIGHBORHOOD, it is considered a dwarf planet

Why do we think there may be life on Jupiters Moon Europa?
  -The are subsurface oceans

The voyager Golden Records:
  -Have sounds and images of Earth

The planet hunting Kepler Telescope identified planets crossing their starts by looking at the slight dimming of the star

One of the main goals of Kepler was to find planets in the Habitable Zon, where liquid water can exist on the surface

Is it possible there are more Earth-like planets than every grain of sand on Earth

Weightlessness can be countered by generated a centrifugal force by spinning a spacecraft

Micrometeoroidss are fast moving tiny rocks that can damage spacecraft and harm astronauts
The radiation associated with solar flares can be very dangerous to astronauts an spacecraft

A solar flare (prominents) is a sudden large energy release from the Sun consisting of clouds25:00

Challenger exploded bc
  O-rings failed
  cold launching tempuratures
  Managers didnt listen to engineers










