TEST Review

Heat in the earth formed from MULTIPLE COLLISIONS that made the young earth how enough to melt its interior,
  allowing heavy minerals (iron and nickel) to MOVE TO THE CENTER / SINK INTO THE CENTER OF THE EARTH

The earths inner core is under too much PRESSURE to be liquid
  -The inner core cant be liquid because of the pressure

The lithosphere is comprised of CRUST and uppermost mantle. It comprises the tectonic plates.

Plate Tectonics: Cold strong LITHOSPHERE float over warm weak ASTHENOSPHERE

What is this major tectonic feature called?
  A subduction zone

What is happening to the two tectonic plates?
  The plates are colliding towards each other, forcing one to go under or "subduct" beneath the other

What is GPS used for in studying the Earth?
  -Deformation that occurs in the surface
  -Tectonic movement
  -Stress build up deforms the earth, before elastic rebound

What kind of plate boundary is this (Mid-Atlantic Ridge)
  -Divergent

Plate tectnics is driven by matle convection (tractions), forces from gravitational potential energy, and slab pull
  Convection is the process by which heat is transferred into a liquid
  Slab Pull is when a slab of lithosphere is being subducted under another plate,
    and that slab gets pulled by gravitational potential energy

Alfred Wegener's evidence for continental drift.
  Fossil evidence, configuration of plate boundaries, and similar geologic features.
  What is the mechanism that finally confirmed Alfred Wegener'stheory that he id NOT know about?
    -Sonar found mid-ocean ridges, HE DID NOT KNOW ABOUT THIS. 

Is the margin between oceanic curst and continental rust always a plate boundary?
  -No

On average, how fast do tectonic plates move?
  -1 inch a year

Could plate tectonics have influenced evolution?
  -Yes

Why do we need 4 satelited to get a position?
  -Because there are the 3 planes (xyz) and time. Longitude, Latitude, Height, and Time

The earths magnetic field arises from the MOVEMENT OF OUTER CORE AROUND INNER CORE

The magnetic field arises from complex motion
associated with convection within the outer core

What does this evidence tell us about the earth? (layers of lava that are oriented to different poles)
  -The Earths poles has shifted in the past. (North becomes South and vice versa)
    -No evidence of mass extinction when poles switch

What is the main inredient in the formation fo Geodes?
  -Mineral rich water

How do we know the Earth is not hollow?
  Laboratory experiments show that rocks are too weak at the hightemperatures and pressures in Earth’s interior to support voids
  The passage of seismic waves show no voidsHow do we know the Earth is not hollow?
  The magnitude of our gravity requires a dense solid, dense interior to our planet
  There is no known physics to build a hollow planet with (or without) a tiny sun at its center
  And if the Earth was hollow, everyone standing on the inside shell would fall into the central Sun and burn up

Diamonds come from a rare type of volcanic eruption that brought them up from great depths at great speed.
  What depths? 100-250 kilometers

Note the largest earthquake to have occured in past 100 years
    Location    Year M   Duration
    1. Chile    1960 9.5 11 min
    2. Alaska   1964 9.2 5 min
    3. Sumatra  2004 9.1 5 min
    4. Japan    2011 9.0 6 min
    5. Kamchatka1952 9.0 4 min 
    
Tectonic plates slide past each other in 3 different ways:
  1. Divergent
  2. Convergent
  3. Transform

Two processes describe the earthquake cycle
  ELASTIC REBOUND: the curst deforms elatically (storing eaergy), then rebounds (like a ball)
  STRIKE SLIP: a fault remains locked while energy builds, then slips suddenly

Stick slip behavior occers because of friction:
  Rough spots along the fualt (called asperities) and they prevent the fault from sliding until they are broken

Three types of faults aise from three types of stress
  -Transform (stike slip faults), shearing stress state
  -Normal, extensional stress states
  -Rust, compressional stress state

How do movies ofte incorrectly depict earthquakes
  -Exaggerate the magnitude of ground shaking
  -Exagerate the group will open up and swallow things
  -Exaggerate the duration of shaking

Can s-waves travel throuh the liquid outer core?
  -No, s-waves cannot go through liquids

Two types of body waves
  -s (side to side propagation) and p waves (Up and down propagation)
  
Two types of surface waves 
  love (looks like a snake moving directly at you) and rayleigh waves (Mini circles on surface, looks like waves on the ocean)

What are some characteristics of surface waves?
  largest and dont travel through the interior of the earth
  also the slowest


P and S waves arrival times can be used to locate an earthquake
  Note the number of seismometers needed to locate (three)

Seismic waves can be used to study the earths INTERIOR

What is the interface called where most of the earthquakes occur?
  Subduction zone

Wadati-Benioff Zone is on Honshu, an island between the Japan Sea and Pacific Ocean
  Its is directly on top of a subduction zone

Earthquake magnitude is a logarithmic scale: For every whole number increase in magnitude, is 10x stronger

What earthquake in China cause 87000 people to die
  Wenchaun, China
  
Buildings can fall over during an earthquake due to LIQUEFACTION, where shaking temporarily turns wet sediments into a fluid
  Hence, a house built on loose sediment is likely to feel moreshaking from an earthquake than a house built on solid rock.

What is this scale, Mercali IntensitY scale
  Measure of how much shaking occurs (Asks "Did you feel it?")

What factor influence the intensity of shaking?
  -Distance
  -Magnitude
  -Local geology

Why is the seismic hazard high in the central US
  -There have been three major earthquakes in the last 200 years

The bigger magnitude earthquakes are NOT always the most density

We can use historic earthquakes to estimate the probability of future earthquakes on the scale of several decades to centuries.

What tool do we use to figure out slip deficit, which informs how big and where an earthquake might occur
  GPS measures slip deficit
  
Unreliable precursors have occurred before earthquakes such as:
  Barking dogs, water table rising, and strange lights in the sky

Foreshocks and aftershocks are simply earthquakes by a different name. 
Once surface waves arrive, poorly constructed buildings fall fast.

In the real word...
  -Faults are not generally steadily loaded
  -Earthquakes do not occur at the same stress level
  -Earthquakes are not the same magnitude
      Earthquakes NOT predictable on a short time scale
  
What to do during an earthquake
  -If indoors in a well engineered building
    -Stay indoors
    -Drop to the ground; take cover under a table.
    -Stay away from glass and anything that could fall.
    -Use a doorway for shelter only if you know it is a strongly supported, loadbearing doorway.
    -DO NOT use the elevators.
  -If indoors in a poorly constructed building
    -Get out of the building as fast as possible
  -If outdoors
    -Stay outdoors, move away from buildings
  
  
 Diagonal beams provide resistance to shaking that often causes buildings to collapse
  
Approaches to reducing the swaying of buildings
  -
  -
  
Earthquake Early Warning System

Concept: Seismic waves travel slower than the speed of light. Therefore, one can detect an earthquake and communicate a warning ahead
         of the shaking.
Forced resonance: When the natural frequency of a structure is excited by external forces of similar frequency.
