Aug26-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are 4 layers to the earth: the crust, mantle, outer core, and inner core.
  -The crust is a solid
  -The mantle is a solid
  -The outer core is liquid
  -The inner core is solid

Collisions cause motion to be converted into heat.
Heat from collisions made the young earth extremely hot, melting its interior, allowing heavy metals like iron and nickel to sink and form the core.
The sinking of metals of different densities is what created the earths layers.

Lithosphere is broken into 13 major plates and a bunch of smaller ones.

Tectonic plates are on the crust (surface of the earth)
Tectonic plates slide past each other in three ways:
  -Convergent: where they are moving towards each other, and in this scenario one goes underneath the other
  -Divergent: where two plates are moving away from each oter     
  -Transform: where two plates are sliding past eacch other

https://app.tophat.com/billing/course/465748/checkout

Aug28-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Watch the core and answer the movie questions on tophat

Subduction zones are the most dangerous of all plate boundaries: most earthquakes, largest earthquakes, most volcanoes
The San Andread Fault is an example of a transform plate boundary, where two plates slide past each other.
Mid-ocean ridges are where new ocean plate is created. Molten rock from deep in the earth rise up in these cracks and cool and connect to the existing plate

There is no space between tectonic plates.

Plate tectonics is driven by mantle convection, slab pull, and gravitational energy gradients the process that cools Earth's hot interior.

Convection is the process by which heat is tranferred through a liquid.
Convection is the up and down movement of material because of change in tempurature.
Convection leads to new plate material forming at mid-ocean ridges and old plate material being destroyed at subduction zones.
  -A good example is a lava lamp


As rock is made at the mid-ocean ridge, and its considered as age 0. It gets older and older at is moves towards the subduction zones

Age of continental crust: oldest parts of crust known as cratons

How did the theory of plate tectonics come about?
  In 1915, Alfred Wegener (1880-1930) argued that the continents were drifting
    -This concept was universally dismissed.
    -Few believed him because it required oceanic crust to be created and destroyed.
  3 Key pieces of evidence for continental drift:
    -North and South American coastlines fit with Europe and Africe
    -Identical Volcanic flows appear on both sides of the Atlantic
    -Fossils of non-swimmers found on both sides of the modern oceans.

In the 1960s we began to be able to measure the age of ocean crust and realized that the occean crust is indeed created and destroyed
Continental Crust contains much older rocks than the oceanic crust.
  -Good evidence that oceanic crust is being created and destroyed.
  
Passive Margins are not current plate boundaries, but they were plate boundaries way back in pangea days.
  -Passive Margins are the borders of continents
  
Can a new plate boundary cause a continent to actually split in half?
  - no
  
All oceans started out at continental rifts
If it continues to spread for 10s of millions of years, the modern day east african rift will one day be the center of a new ocean.
  -Cool shit a new ocean is forming an we know it

Tectonic Plates move about as fast as your fingernails grow (1-inch per year)

Over the course of millions of years, sometimes the north and south pole switch.

  
The Himilayas, the tallestmoun rains on Earth, result from the collision of India into Eurasia,
  the only place on Earth where two continents are colliding

India colliding into Eurasia completely removed an Ocean, squashed.

Aug30---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 or 2 in class questions through tophat

The hiiayas, the tallest mountains on earth,
result from the collision of India into Eurasia, the only place on earth where two continents are colliding.

The process of isostasy is when Icebergs and mountains both float within a volume of denser material.
  
Ice (.9g/cm^3) is 10% less dense than water(1.0g/cm^3), so 10% of the iceberf floats above the water
Crust is 15% less dense than mantle, so 15% of a mountain floats above the surface.
  The underside of a mountain is called a mountain root

They also both melt over time
  Icebergs melt. When they melt, the ratio of iceberg above water stays contant
  Mountains erode over time, the ratio of mountain to mountain root stays constant.

Isostasy explains most of the Earth's topography.
  The maps of crustal thickness and height of topography are very similar
  TAKEAWAY: The measure of the deepness of mountain roots directly relate to the height of the surface crust in realtion to sea level

Why does the earth have a magnetic field?
  -The earths magnetic field arises from motion within the liquid iron outer core.
  -The magnetic field created in the outer core acs like a hige bar magnet is located in he earths core

Inclination of the magnetic field
  At the equator, the field is parallel to the earths surface.
  In alaka, the north pole on a compass arrow points down, not across the earths surface

The northern lights occer because magnetic fields
  It draws in outer space radiation, and the interaction between those particle and our atmosphere create the amazing phenominon

The magnetic field arises from complex motion associted with convetion witin the outer core (called a dynamo)

Doom and gloom? not really
  -Protection from harmful solar radiation comes primarily from our atmosphere, not the magnetic field.
  -Large solat flares (massive concentrations of charged particles) can knock out power grids and scramble communication systems.
      Without the magnetic field, these problems would get worse and would heppend immediately, but owuld not be deadly
  -Birds(and fish) and planes would not fall from the sky,
   lighting would not destroy citis, people with pacemakers would not drop dead, and no mass extinctions

Every 300,000 years or so, the poles switch
The rocks are a permanent record of the earths magnetic polarity, forming mgneti stripes on he ocean floor

times where the magnetic field matches modern day poles, called normal, when its not, called reversed

How do we know we can survive for a little without the magnetic field
  -Sometimes the poles reverse, magnetic noth becomes south and vuce versa.
  -Each magnetic reversal leads to a period of several thousand years when the magnetic field all but disapears.
  -No mass extinctions have occured during magnetic reversals

What would the immediate effect be if the Earth lost its magnetic field?
  -Our electrical grid would have some major problems

A ginormous Geode 700 miles down?

Geodes form in cavitties that fill with mineral rich water that leads to crystal growth.
  They are only found close to the earths surface

The largest Geode was found in a silver mine that was 8x2x2 in spain.



