Unit8: Asteroids, Comets, and Impacts

Movie: Deep Impact

Oct25------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Comets: A comet is an icy small Solar Sytem body that, when close to the sun, displays a visable
        coma (a thin, fuzzy, temporary atmosphere) and sometimes also a tail. These typically burn up in the Earth's atmosphere

Asteroids: Asteroids are a class of small Solar System bodies in orbit around the sun further awa than coments and don't have a coma.
           They can break-up into meteoroids and burn up in the Earth's atmosphere

Meteoroids: Small rocks (less than a few meters across) traveling thorugh space
Meteors: Small rocks from space that light up in the night sky as they burn up the Earths atmosphere
Meteorites: Small pieces of place rock that survive passage through the atmosphere to be pickedup on a planet surface. 
  Exist because meteroids burn in the Earth's atmosphere

Meteoroids are small rocky bodies that travel through space
Meteors are poduced when meteoroids burn up in the Earth's atmosphere and light up the sky (can be broken up asteroids),
  and meteorites are peices of these meteors that make it all the way down to the surface

A fragment of the 2013 Chelyabinsk Meteorite was recovered from the bottom of lake in Russia

Meteoritess are gifts of the aky as to what is out there. They come in 4 basic types: each with its own history of formation

Iron, Stony, Stony-Iron, Chondrites

93% of meteorites are made of stone
6% are made of iron
1% are stony-iron (also called pallasites)

The easiest place to find meteorites is Antartica, where the flowing glaciers collect and deposit them.
  And because they are dark they are easily seen on the ice

Martian meteorites are found on Earth
  -Martian meteorites are identifies from trapped gas bubbles that are identical in composition to Mars' atmospheres
  -They are though to have been ejected from Mars by large impacts

The lafayette meteorite was "discovered" in a collection of rocks at Purdue University

Asteroids are large space rocks that range in size from meters to 100s of kilometers
  -Asteroids have smooth surfaces due to a coating of regolith - ejecta fragments from many impacts

Asteroids, and other airless bodies, ten to have smooth surfaces because of regolith: layers of loose dust and small particles
  left over from many impacts

We find asteroids by time-exposure photos of the sky using ground and space based telescopes

There are more than half-million known asteroids and millions more to be discovered

Most asterpods reside in the asteroid belt located between Mars and Jupiter. Distance between them in ~500,000 km

But some asteroids orbit well inside Mars
Asteroids that orbit near Earth are called near Earth Asteroids (NEAs), or Near Earth Objects (NEOs)

There are an estimated 1 million asteroids bigger than 1km in diameter and billions of smaller ones

In 2017, we were visited by a rogue asteroid nont from our Solar System

It came through on a hyperbolic orbit based on the Sun's gravity and left
  - in other words, if it was a spacecraft, it never turned on its engines

The rogue asteroid was thought to be about a quarter-mile long, and about 10 times longer than it is wide.

Comets

Comets are dirty iceballs (micture of ice and rock) as old as the solar system itself.

Comet nuclei tend to be fairly small, generally only 10km across or less

As a comet approaches the Sun, solar radiation causes the ices to vaporize
  -The gas tail is composed of moleciles ionized by UV liht from the Sun, causeing it ot emit blue light
  -The gas tail is pushed directly away from the Sun by the solar wind (charged particles streaming form the Sun)

Dust jets from comet Tempel 1 contain ejected blocks ranging only up to 10s of centimeters

Dust jets do not turn on and off with sunrise and sunset They turn on sporatically and last for short time periods (10s of minutes).
  We are not sure why, aybe landslides push debris into invisible gas jets.

Cometary jets are very low pressure, but there is also not much graviyt, so we dont really know what will
  happen to that astronauts causght in a jet. But whatever it is, it will happen slowly

Comets lose mass with each pass of the sun. After too many passes, the fate of all comets is to break up. When this happens,
  comet debris continues along the same orbit, forming comet grouops, ntil the peices are eventually eaten up by the Sun.

Comet ISON's highly elliptical orbit around the Sun showed that it came from very far away

Meteor showers are created when the Earth passes through the remnants of broken up comet.

A comets gravity is several hundred thousand times smaller than Earth's 
  So how would you land a spacecraft on its surface without bouncing off?

The rosetta spacecraft dropped the Philae lander to the surface of Churymov-Gerasimeko, which deployed harpoons to grab it.

Unfortunately the harpoons didn't work and Philae bounced several times before settling near a cliff


















