UNIT 4: TSUNAMI

A tsunami is a series of waves caused by the displacement of a large volume of water

A tsunami has the power to strip the land before
  -Everything gets wrecked

One of the major hazards of a tsunami is the tremendous amount of debris the water picks up and carries inland

The most common means of generating a tsunai is elastic rebound during a large subduction zone earthquake

The 2004 Suatra tsunami was caused bya  subduction zone earthquake that extended from 1000 km

Tsunai waves can have similar heights to large win blown waves, but carry a much longer volume of water and travel much further inland

Tsunami wave mechanics
  -Out at sea (in deep water) tsunami waves hvae long wavelengths (distance from crest to crest), low wave heights, and great speed
  -As waves approach shore they slow down, which allows the back of the waves to catch up the front,
    reducing wavelength, but increasing wave height
  -The trough occurs when the wave goes out to sea before hitting

2011 Japan tsunami wave heights in the open ocean where 1 meter or less, but reached more than 10 meters as they approached the shore

Tsunami waves (like all water waves) break when the wave height is about equal to the water depth

Problems with San Andreas:
  -The tsunami wave is ridiculously large
  -It should have broken further out at sea
  -The San Andreas Fault cannot generate a tsunami - it is a strike slip fault mostly on land

In-Class Question
What's wrong with this scene?
  -a Tsunami waves out at sea should habe smaller heights
  -b Tsunami waves do not break in deep water
  -c Both of the above

Problem in Interstellar Scene:
  -The tsunami is ridiculously tall and narrow
  -You cant have a 1000 foot high wave pass through 1 foot of water without breaking
  -The is no trough, just a crest

A tsunami wave can continue coming on shore for 20 minutes and reach many miles inland

A tsunami wave can catch people inland unaware

If you are in your car, and the streets sudently fill with water, stay in your car and ride it out

Inlets trapped the 2011 Japan tsunami causing the water to rise

Japan tsunami heights were sufficient enough to put boats and houses ontop of houses

Sep 25--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"A historical document compiled in 901 C.E. told of an earthquake in 869 C.E. that destroyed a castle town in
  Northeastern Japan and a subsequent tsunami that inundated the surrounding area, killing 1000."

20+ mter high tsunamis have occured 4 times in the past 400 years in Japan

Dozens of tsunami stones along the coast of Japan warn residents not to build below them. Some are more than 600 years old

New tsunami stones for 2011 tsunami were made

In-Class Question

True/False: The wave heights (10 meters) of the 2011 Japan tsunami was unprecedented in Japan’s history,
              and thus it is understandable that they were not prepared for it.

  A: I'm actually not here
  B: I'm not paying attention
  C: True
  D: False

Answer: False

Tsunami sand (aka Tsunamiitte) is a sedmentary unit desposited as the result of a tsunami

Our own analogous tsunami stones are written in sand deposits along the entire coast of the Pacific Northwest

Tsunami Mitigation

Several Hundred Thousand people have been killed by tsunamis - but today this is one of the most avoidable natural killers

Tsunami warning signs and what you should do
  1. Significant seismic shaking near the shore:
    -20-40 munites before a tsunami hirs: Head to high ground
  2. The tide appeads to go out very vast and very far (trough):
    -5-10 minutes before the tsunami hits: Get to high ground faster
  3. Massive white water heading toward you (crest)
    -Seconds before the tsunami hits: RUN! ... and maybe look for shelter ona  higher floor (but choose your building wisely)
  4. If the tsunami is very close behind you jump in a car (not on top!)
  5. Tsunami consist of 3-10 waves, and often the 2nd or 3rd wave is the largest
  
Tsunami waves are often preceded by coastal waters flowing outward to sea

Tsunamis often consist between 3-10 waves
  Second tsunami wave strikes following the 2011 Japan earthquake - you can notice the water fro the first wave heading bak out to sea

Hilo Bag, Hawii was destroyed by the thrid tsunami wave generated by the 1961 M9.5 Chilean Earthquake 10,500km away

Japan has prepared for 4-6 meter high tsunami waves with a variety of seawalls

Elevated Platforms were designed to protect people who did not have time to escape

The desctruction caused by the 2011 Japan tsunami could have been decreased by several actions
  -Dont build a nuclear power plant on a coast with known tsunami risks
  -Build ultra-high seawalls
  -Reduce populations that live near the shore

In Class Question

How many large waves are usually associated with an earthquake generated tsunami?

  A: 1
  B: 3 to 10
  C: 30 to 50

Answer: 3-10

Even at 400mph, it takes almost a day for a tsunami to cross the Pacific Ocean
  Note how seafloor bathymetry influences the tsunami waves at the surface.
  This is because tsunami waves involve the entire water column

It took many hours for the 2004 Sumatra tsunami to reach for shores. So why did so many people on those shores die?
  -Lack of education about tsunamis
  -Lack of an early warning system to detect tsunami
  -Lack of a system to alert the pubic if a tsunami is suspected to be observed

DART (Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis) Early Warning System

A tsunami can be caused by anything that displaces a large volume of water *Clip of Godzilla*
  Most common to least common
    Distant Earthquake -> Local Earthquake -> Landslide -> Volcanic Eruption -> Asteroid Impact

Some of the largest tsunamis are generated by rockslides into deepwater

In 1905 and 1934, large rockslides fell from heights over 500m into the fjords in Norway, creating tsunamis that killed over 100 people

The Geiranger Fjord is under constant threat from the mountain Akerneset, which is about to drop a large volume of rock into the fjord.

10 minutes to get 300 feet above sea level *The Wave 2015*





















